Everyone's always complaining SEO is
dead. It can't grow. Word of mouth is so
hard. All of the ingredients for new
distribution platform are essentially
happening. My prediction the new
distribution platform will be chat GPT.
There's a bunch of signals that they're
about to launch that. This is a huge
opportunity for companies to get on it.
It ends up being a prisoner's dilemma.
Don't trick yourself into thinking that
you can't play the game. The cycles seem
to be getting shorter and shorter. So,
you actually have a smaller amount of
time. If you don't do it, your
competitors are going to go to the new
platform and your customer expectations
change. There is no opting out of the
game. This is the opportunity to disrupt
an incumbent. If you're a late stage
company, you place multiple bets. For
startups, it's a totally different
ballgame. You have to choose one and go
all in. Think about companies like Zinga
that grew on Facebook and then became
massive companies. Building a great
product is one of those things that's
necessary but not sufficient. And
actually, the separation is between
those that build really great
distribution. What would be the backup
if not JBT? My hypothesis of who's best
positioned would actually be
today. My guest is Brian Balffor. Brian
is the founder and CEO of Reforge, a
company that I've been a longtime fan
and advocate of. Historically, Reforge
has focused primarily on teaching
courses on product and growth. But more
recently, they've transitioned to
building their own products, including a
product called Reforge Insights and a
bunch more really cool stuff coming very
soon. Prior to Reforge, Brian led growth
at HubSpot. And over the course of his
career, he has seen the rise and fall of
every major distribution channel,
including Facebook's ad platform, Google
Ads and SEO, and the Apple App Store.
Based on what he's seeing, he is
predicting the emergence of a brand new
and powerful distribution channel that
will likely arise in the next 6 months
centered most likely around Chat GBT. It
is really rare for a new growth channel
to open up. It's been a long time since
the last one appeared. And the people
who recognize this and hop on it early
are the ones that reap the most rewards.
So, this is a huge deal. In this
conversation, Brian shares what he's
predicting, what he's seeing, why this
is a big deal, and what you should be
doing about it right now. I highly
recommend you listen to this full
conversation and discuss the
ramifications with your team. If you
enjoy this podcast, don't forget to
subscribe and follow it in your favorite
podcasting app or YouTube. Also, if you
become an annual subscriber of my
newsletter, you get a bunch of
incredible products for free for 1 year,
including Lovable, Replet, Bolt, Naden,
Linear, Superhum, Dcript, Whisper Flow,
Gamma, Perplexity, Warp, Granola, Magic
Patterns, Raycast, ChapiRD, and Mobin.
Check it out at lennisnewsletter.com and
click product pass. With that, I bring
you Brian Balffor. Today's episode is
brought to you by DX, the developer
intelligence platform designed by
leading researchers. To thrive in the AI
era, organizations need to adapt
quickly. But many organization leaders
struggle to answer pressing questions
like which tools are working, how are
they being used, what's actually driving
value. DX provides the data and insights
that leaders need to navigate this
shift. With DX, companies like Dropbox,
Booking.com, Adion, and Intercom get a
deep understanding of how AI is
providing value to their developers and
what impact AI is having on engineering
productivity. To learn more, visit DX's
website at getdx.com/lenny.
That's getdx.com/lenny.
This episode is brought to you by Base
Camp. Base Camp is the famously
straightforward project management
system from 37 Signals. Most project
management systems are either inadequate
or frustratingly complex, but Base Camp
is refreshingly clear. It's simple to
get started, easy to organize, and Basec
Camp's visual tools help you see exactly
what everyone is working on and how all
work is progressing. Keep all your files
and conversations about projects
directly connected to the projects
themselves so that you always know where
stuff is and you're not constantly
switching contexts. Running a business
is hard. Managing your projects should
be easy. I've been a longtime fan of
what 37 Signals has been up to and I'm
really excited to be sharing this with
you. Sign up for a free account at
basscamp.com/lenny.
Get somewhere with basecamp.
Brian, thank you so much for being here
and welcome back to the podcast. Yeah,
thanks for having me. Excited for this
one. I'm really excited to have you
back. Uh we're just going to dive right
in. Essentially, you've uncovered a a
really important trend uh or insight
about how products are going to grow
differently in the future, how growth is
changing. And this is something that I
think a lot of people need to hear. So I
asked you to come on to share what
you're seeing. Uh I also think this is
just very timely. I uh I think you said
like in you're going to say in the next
like six months things might
significantly change. So I'm really
excited to do this. We're going to spend
this whole conversation on this on this
insight to set us up. What is just the
big idea? What's the high level idea
here? Just like you, I've spent my whole
career just like really passionate about
startups, you know, figuring out how to
build products that win, that emerge in
new markets. And uh one of the things
that I have, you know, learned over time
or one of the things you hear a lot is
from a lot of folks is uh to win you
have to like really build a great
product. A lot of the advice kind of
boils down to that. And one of the
things that I feel like I've banged my
head against the wall in a lot of ways
of my career is actually telling people
that building a great product is one of
those things that's necessary um but not
sufficient and actually the separation
is between those that build really great
distribution. And so uh this general
partner his name is Alex Rample he's at
Andre and Horowitz actually wrote this
blog post 10 years ago um back in like I
think two like 2015. In the essence of
the blog post, he basically says uh one
thing which is that startups is a game
of trying to get distribution before the
incumbent can copy right so it's this
kind of concept of escape velocity and
and so you know on that note right which
I think is like a very good summary of
like what you're trying to do in a
startup and distribution is that we're
right now living in this environment
where that game of startups kind of
getting distribution faster than the
incumbent has gotten way harder in a lot
of ways and in some small cases has
gotten a little bit easier. But if we
think about this, the way that it's
gotten harder and some of the things
that probably a lot of founders or or
folks working on the growth side
probably feel is that one is that
incumbents can copy faster these days,
right? So that window that you have to
get that escape velocity has actually
shrunk. It's it's decreased. The second
thing is that the a lot of the organic
distribution that we've had especially
over the past few years has really
shrunk as well. So, everybody's talking
about the decline of SEO and, you know,
clicks declining, but you also see it in
some other cases, right? A lot of these
social platforms
don't really let you send as much
traffic to sites. You know, LinkedIn
just changed their algorithm, which has
really dropped organic distribution.
Obviously, the the Twitter tox
transition that happened, right? Like
Tik Tok's almost always been like that.
And then the third way that it's gotten
harder is that AI is really good at
writing software, right? And code
generation. And so everybody's kind of
feeling this infinite increase of
competition, especially at the startup
level. And you know, YC is pumping out
six of the same thing every single
cohort, right? Like that's what that's
what it literally feels like. So it's
gotten way harder. This game, this
escape velocity game has gotten a lot
harder. It's gotten easier in some very
exceptional cases like a cursor or
something where AI has kind of been like
this spark, you know? I know you wrote
uh the blog post about the race car
engine and I think you said like there's
like the spark plug in the engine,
right? and and so AI kind of really
created that uh a new type of spark, a
new type of interest of early adopters
to to to fuel some some new players in a
short period of time, right? And so it's
amazing to see something like Cursor
overtake market share of something like
GitHub Copilot in nine months or less,
right? Like that that's how fast it
happened. It's kind of crazy. But the
main thing that people need to
understand is okay well if that's the
game I'm playing, right? How to get
escape velocity before the incumbent.
Like what are all the ways to do that?
and um and to really figure that out.
And there's multiple ways that this can
happen, but one of the major ways, one
of the major major ways that we always
see is that uh this can happen when new
distribution platforms emerge. Um and
because when new distribution platforms
emerge, startups are usually the fastest
to take advantage of them. It's slower
for the incumbents to move. It gives
startups this opportunity essentially to
play this game. So Casey Wyers wrote
this blog post about two years ago um
maybe like 18 months ago about uh the AI
technology shift and his key point was
the AI technology shift has been a
technology shift that has not come with
the distribution shift yet. So if you
look historically we've had a bunch of
technology shifts from you know uh the
internet to the cloud to mobile to
social like all these different types of
things and some of them come with
distribution new distribution platforms
new ways to distribute products and some
of them don't but the most power
powerful ones the most impactful ones
are the ones that um do come with these
new distribution platforms and so his
second key point was that these two
things don't actually happen at once
usually you get the technology shift
then you get the distribution shift
shift a little bit later. So now we're a
couple years from that post. We are a
couple years into AI technology shift
and one of the things that I am seeing
is all of the conditions, all of the
ingredients for a new distribution
platform to emerge are essentially
happening. And so I think we're at an
inflection point where we're going to
see this emerge really fast. And the key
thing for everybody to know is that as
new distribution platforms emerge, they
follow the same four-step cycle. And
it's kind of a game that you're playing
that everybody's playing. And so, just
like any game, you kind of need to know
the rules of the game. You need to know
the steps of the game in order to have
any sort of opportunity to win. And
that's kind of like the the the thing
that the that I've lived through once
again, both painfully and um also in
good ways. and is something that I'm
keeping my eye on and something that
I've been talking about. So, before we
go into that, you know, four-step cycle,
I figure I I'll pause there to see if
you you have any follow-up questions on
that. Okay, this is amazing. So,
essentially what you're saying is we
have all these ways to grow. There's
SEO, there's paid growth, there's sales.
All these uh channels have been around
for a long time. They're extremely
saturated. Everyone's always complaining
SEO is dead. It can't grow with SEO
anymore. It can't grow. Word of mouth is
so hard. There's so many amazing things
now. That's hard. Uh paid is so hard.
It's just like all this money
>> tax are rising. Yeah. All these things.
Yeah. So all these saturated channels
and what you're saying is there's an
emerging new channel that has not yet
been saturated and this is a huge
opportunity for companies to get on it.
Uh and you'll talk about timing because
it's a little tricky to even know
exactly when to go big on this.
>> That's right.
>> Um but that's a huge deal. This has been
a long time since there's a new way to
grow that you can actually use as a
lever for growth and not just hope for
the best.
>> Okay.
>> Uh before you get into the the cycles,
do you want to tease what the answer is
just to give people a little hint or do
you want to keep it secret?
>> Well, to be clear, right, like okay, so
um my prediction will we don't we don't
have a clear winner yet. Um my
prediction of the new distribution
platform will be chat GPT. um in some
ways that people probably already think
it's happening in some ways that it
won't uh but the thing that is less
important or like that is more important
than whether I have predicted the exact
winner correctly the thing that's more
important is to understand the cycle and
and evaluate like how to determine where
you want to place your bets and how to
place those bets which I know which I
know we'll talk about because I I'm I
could be wrong about the chat GPT
prediction and what's going to happen
there. Um there's I think there's going
to be two parts of it. There's going to
be what they do with like a chat GPT
search experience, but I think the
bigger thing will be whatever they do
with launching a third party platform on
top of chat chat GPT. There's a bunch of
signals that um they're about to uh that
they're about to launch that. I'm pretty
sure it's going to be chat GPT. The
thing I'm way more sure about is that
some new distribution platform will
emerge and it will follow the same
four-step cycle. That that that's kind
of that's kind of the key. So could be
wrong on the first piece. I am very
confident on the second piece.
>> Okay, excellent foreshadowing. Uh I
completely agree. If it's anything, it
would be chat GPT at this point. Let's
get into it. What are the what are the
cycles that uh platforms generally
follow? Yeah. And I'll give some
examples of this, but let me explain the
four uh the first four step uh the four
steps of the cycle first and then we'll
go through a bunch of examples of all
those individual steps. So the the four
steps are essentially one is like I call
a step zero. It's it's the the
conditions of the market have been met.
Um, step one is about a moat, step two
is about a platform opening and step
three is about uh the platform closing
for control and monetization. So, let me
kind of briefly explain each one. Um,
step zero is about the competitive
market being uh met, the conditions
being met. And there's a few part piece
of this. One is that typically what
happens is that a uh there is consensus
that there is going to be this new huge
category right think social think mobile
like all those types of things and in
this case right uh these AI like chat
platforms like a chat GPT or a clock so
there's consensus about that but there's
no clear winner yet and you typically
have somewhere between five to seven you
know major players really battling it
out right so And they're all kind of
looking for what is the edge? What is
the thing that is going to that is going
to to help me win because all of these
dynamics you in in all the history they
either end up in monopolies or
duopolies, right? And so this the stakes
are really large and so the competition
is fierce. So that's kind of step zero.
And I I think we could all agree that we
are in that mode, you know, right now.
We've got we've got open AI battling
with claude battling with Gemini uh in
Google with whatever Meta comes out with
new their new team you know so on and so
forth like and there's huge amounts of
capital there's consensus like all the
type they are in a fierce composition so
that's step zero step one is then um
these players somebody
essentially identifies whatever the moat
is the thing that is going to help build
them defensibility and help them hit
escape velocity and become that monopoly
or duopoly in that uh single category.
And once they figure out what that mode
is, then they need to press the
advantage, right? They need to figure
out how to gather that moat as fast as
humanly possible. And it tends to be
that you can't do that by yourself. And
so you kind of need the help of an
ecosystem in order to gather more of
that mo. And that typically comes down
to thirdparty content creators or app
developers and other businesses. And so
they all establish like a third-party
platform, right, that has some
incentives built in. And usually the
value exchange is, hey, you develop on
top of my platform, right? You add more
use cases, you know, more engagement,
like all all of these things to my
platform. And in exchange, I'm going to
give you something in return. And
usually that thing that's in exchange is
I'm going to give you some new form of
distribution for your application and
for your business. But what essentially
happens as we go over time is that we go
into step three, which is the closing
period, which is at some point all of
these companies end up um starting to
lock down the platform. And this tends
to happen for reasons of like
monetization and growth, right? uh they
either competitively don't want you know
somebody to use their own you know
platform to disrupt themselves like we
saw that in the early Twitter days with
things like Vine and Periscope right
like shutting those things down
unceremoniously right or they need to
find ways to monetize at a deeper and
deeper level because all these companies
like they have to grow and you know
Google's the classic example here of
just more and more real estate has
either been taken up by either ads or
their own, you know, first-party
applications. And so that's the key is
like they close it down by doing one of
two by one of a few things. They either
shut it down entirely, two, they develop
their own firstparty applications to
absorb the the highest use cases, or
three, they artificially depress the
organic distribution that they gave you
in the step prior to push you towards
paid mechanisms in order to monetize.
And so I think we should go through like
multiple examples here, but that's kind
of like the core essence of of the four
steps. And so I'll I'll pause there.
Awesome. So it's essentially figure out
what's going to make create
defensibility long term. What's remote?
Bring everyone in. Hey everyone, welcome
to to Facebook. Uh everyone joins
Facebook and then okay and or developers
build on Facebook to bring in more
people on Facebook and then they're like
okay now you got to pay. There's a toll
and but you love this so much and you're
so hooked. All your friends are here.
you may as well stick.
>> That's right. That's right.
>> Uh, amazing.
>> Okay. So, yeah, a few examples would be
great.
>> Yeah. So, you you just hit on the first
one. The f this is the first one that I
always think about because this is where
I learned about this cycle very early in
my career. Like my one of my first
companies uh was during the whole uh uh
the Facebook platform boom, you know,
social gaming, all of those
applications. And I lived the full cycle
in a very short period. I lived the the
glory days and the just the absolute
horror days and and it was very painful.
But this is exactly what happened. So
let's go through the four steps. So step
zero, Facebook was in a brutal battle
with uh MySpace, Friendster um and a few
others. People forget this. People
forget that there was actually like a
bunch of competitors at that time. And
in fact, those competitors were bigger
than Facebook at the time. They had more
users back in 2007 when Facebook
launched um their third party platform.
Uh but one of the key things is that
Facebook was very early to the insight
about uh the direct network effects and
that um there's going to create real
lock in that the the more friends the
more of the global network that was on
there the more that it was just going to
feed and hit this escape velocity. And
so at the time they launched their
platform I think they were maybe like
1/4if uh the size of you know something
like mspace or even fster orchid like
these are some of the names at that time
but they opened up their third party
platform and what was the value exchange
they went to third party developers and
they said okay we've created this canvas
and they used to call it the canvas and
they were like you could put anything in
the canvas that you want an app a game
whatever you can monetize in any way you
want. We just want this sidebar real
estate on on the ads. That's that's what
we're really interested in. And so there
is this mad mad gold rush uh on that
Facebook. Oh, sorry. The other part of
that was not only will you put it there,
we're going to give you access to all of
these notification channels and feed to
get distribution for your application.
That was that was the other piece of it.
And so you had this mad rush of
developers um coming in and you had this
huge uh like social application, social
gaming boom. uh the people just grew
incredibly virally uh very fast. But
eventually essentially what happened
over time is they kept peeling back that
value exchange. They first were like ah
actually you know that those dollars
that you're you're making inside that
canvas area. Well, we want a percentage
of that, right? And so they changed that
and then they figured out their like
their ad systems and then they started
peeling back you know they started
suppressing access to all of the organic
channels that they had. Eventually they
went all the way towards absorbing the
highest uh you know use case into their
own firstparty platform things like uh
firstparty applications things like
events, photos, all those types of
things and basically shut down the
platform um for dead. And these
companies that have basically built on
top of this platform,
you know, uh the other thing is by the
time they started closing all those
things down, all those competitors that
we talked about, they were so far ahead
at that point because they had built off
the back of all these developers coming,
adding use cases, bringing more users
onto the platform, like all like
identifying that mode. They were so far
ahead, it didn't matter. It didn't
matter what the other what the other
folks uh did at that point. And and
that's what kind of really gives you uh
confidence to start closing down. But
there's so many other examples of this,
right? If if we go through it, right? So
>> just before you get other examples, just
something I'll highlight here. One is
the mode they identified in theory was
the friend graph. I imagine just like
once we have all your friends, you're
not going to want to go anywhere.
>> I imagine it's also uh important to
note. You may not This is kind of like a
natural thing that would happen if you
build the thing and it grows and you're
like, "Oh, maybe we should change
strategy." I imagine not everyone even
knows this is what will happen and they
kind of organically evolve their
strategy or do you think everyone's just
like this is our going to be our plan
step 1 2 3 4 I think a different version
of that question is I think some people
could sit here and interpret this as all
these folks are evil right and and
that's not what I'm saying right like
that's actually not what I'm saying I
want to be very I want to be very clear
on that uh because I think you know a
lot of the a lot this cycle happens
because of competitive and capitalistic
like dynamics and pressures. It's it's
the same environment that enables like
creating amazing new companies right
here in the US. So, and and there's
there's like two sides of the coin. And
so, you go through this cycle because
it's a competitive environment. You're
trying to figure out how to beat
competitors and this is one of the
strategies to beat competitors, but at
some point like you just have to
continue growing. You still have you
have to grow those dollars. Like the the
market does not reward flat companies if
anybody's noticed. you have to keep
growing and so they have to keep finding
ways to grow as well as prevent their
own disruption, right? They they can get
so big and they can give access so much
access of distribution to new
developers. They don't want to enable uh
their own disruption as well as like
they need to keep growing. And so my
guess is anybody who is kind of sitting
in their shoes, you know, owning their
platform is going to follow the exact
same playbook and and the exact same
reasoning. And you know, look, sometimes
it happens also because it actually is
the best thing for the user. Facebook's
channels did get super spammy and like
all of those things. And that was part
of the reason, you know, they they play
this. But let's be honest, it wasn't the
only reason, right? Like a lot of it was
a lot of it for was for these other
reasons. And so I don't think it's evil.
It's just you need to know how to play
the you just need to know how to play
the game. That that's competition.
That's business. They're playing you. So
you need to play them. like that like
that that might be a little a little
sadistic or something but but that is
that is business that's you're you're in
a game of competition.
>> Yeah. Essentially the incentives are
pointing you in this direction.
Capitalism this how capitalism works.
>> Um and so it'll pull everyone in this
direction even if they they don't they
want to avoid it.
>> Let's do a couple more examples.
>> Yeah, we'll go through them quick. You
know, I I think everybody's probably
Google's an interesting one because it
played out over a much longer period of
time. You know, Facebook happened over
the course of about in fiveish years,
something like that. Google kind of did
it like very slowly over years but uh
same thing right massive early massive
competition against Yahoo I don't know
Altivist I like you name them all right
uh that was even before my that that was
even before my time right they were
first to really identify these data
modes and incentivizing um essentially
web developers content folks to optimize
you know for their search algorithms it
create this great great distribution
mechanism everybody's kind of building
content and everything you for them. But
o over time, slowly but surely, right,
they did uh two things. One is more and
more of that real estate uh became ads
that they were monetizing. So, they're
suppressing organic distribution in
order to push people towards the ads as
well as absorbing a bunch of of the
highest value first party use cases,
things like travel, you know, as an
example or um even like, you know, like
restaurant search and like all those
types of things. you know the Yelp
former Yelp CEO and founder has has been
you know been out there saying a lot a
lot of things about about these
practices. So same same exact cycle.
Mobile went through the exact same
cycle, right? iOS created a new
distribution mechanism. They were in
massive competi. They they had a ton of
competition among different phones when
they first started on. They found the
defensibility was more about the apps.
They got in all the developers, created
the the app store, like all these types
of things. But over time, we've seen
more and more restrictions there on that
front. And then most recently, right,
like we've seen this happen in smaller
places, too. LinkedIn as an example
first went through this wave with
company pages right they were like ah
companies you know come on promote your
company page bring in more users like
all that type of stuff and then get get
all these followers and then of course
they you get almost no distribution now
through your company page uh because
they're pushing you towards ads and then
they recently just did this with
personal profiles too which is they
really boosted um distribution for
individuals to create content for that
platform. They then introduced the
thought leader ad format, a way to
monetize those those individual posts.
And now you've seen them really pull
back on that organic distribution. So
this happens in big forms and it happens
um even in in smaller use cases as well.
But once again, the steps of the cycle
are exactly the same. And the key part
about this too is it the broad trend is
that the cycles seem to be getting
shorter and shorter and shorter and
shorter. So you actually have a smaller
amount of time to play the game. Okay.
And the big aha here is yes, this will
end maybe not great for you, but there's
this magical period when they're open to
customers and users where you can grow
like crazy because they want everyone to
come and they give you distribution. And
what you're saying essentially is chat
GPT potentially some other platform
maybe uh is about to enter this mode.
>> Yeah. Well, let me first before we get
to chat GBT, I think the natural
reaction when when you first realize
this is screw them. I'm not playing that
game, right? Like that that's what I
feel like most people uh like how how
they react, right? Because um because
the unfortunate truth is is that a lot
of companies don't predict that last
stage and end up in a really hard hard
position, right? So many companies got
completely killed during uh you know the
crash of the the Facebook social
platform. Apple's 30% tax, you know,
basically destroyed a bunch of types of
um types of applications and business
models uh because it just you couldn't
you like it was just wasn't like margin
effective like all so many companies
built on, you know, SEO loops, right,
that are in serious serious uh trouble
right now if that's their only channel.
So so all these things, right? And so I
think the natural reaction is yeah like
like why would I play this game if I'm a
startup or or a company right and you
can even see this with like chat GPT as
an example right uh they just launched
these like deep research connectors um
one of them was my former company
HubSpot and you know if you sat inside
HubSpot and you were just thinking in
isolation you would be like well why
would I want to make all of my data
accessible through chat GPT and have
like all of the usage you start to acrew
through there, right? Like that doesn't
really make sense in isolation, but we
don't we don't operate in isolation.
Once again, we operate in a competitive
environment. And what's going to happen
is that if you don't do it, your
competitors are going to certainly go to
the new platform and your customer
expectations change and you have to rise
to those customers expectations. Like
they're going to start expecting you to
be in these new experiences and all
these things. And so it it ends up being
a prisoner's dilemma, right? which is
like you there is no opting out of the
game. You have to play the game and and
so it's better to be early
than than to be super late uh to this
game especially especially if you are a
startup, right? Uh that that kind of
like the the key uh that that's kind of
like the key opportunity. And so we'll
talk a little bit more about how to play
the game more, but it's it's it's better
to be early as well as then than then
the key the harder part about it is is
anticipating that last stage of the
cycle and figuring out how to sequence
away from something before that last
cycle comes. So I think that's the key
part. Um but let me pause there and then
I'll talk a little bit about chat GBT
and and some of my reasoning behind
that. Cool. So what you're saying is not
only is there going to be this big
opportunity to grow.
>> If you don't take advantage of it,
somebody in your space will.
>> So it's not only there's an opportunity,
but this is something you need to do
because you might miss the boat. And I
think about companies like Zinga that
grew on Facebook and then became massive
companies. And you know, if they didn't
do that, they would have missed the
boat. Someone else would have uh eaten
that lunch. Uh I don't know. I'm
thinking about the Technology Bros
podcast on Twitter right now, TBPN,
where they basically figure it out on
Twitter. You can create this like live
stream and you see it all day in your
Twitter feed just like, "Hey, they're
broadcasting and it's a really cool
distribution channel." So, so I think
there's like a big call to arms here
almost of just uh the opportunities
emerging and you basically need to pay
attention. You can't opt out.
>> That's right.
>> Okay. Exactly. Let's chat. Yeah. So,
let's talk chat GPT.
>> So, look like like let's go through this
cycle. We right now we're in that
competitive environment like we said
like all those players we talked about
chatbt Claude Gemini all these folks
they're they are battling it out right
uh and we've seen this with you know the
talent wards especially over the past
you know month or so and and so there's
no clear winner yet but there's
consensus around uh the category the
second thing is then okay what's the
moat has the moat been identified and
who seems to have identified it the
first or is furthest alone I think
there's uh You know, my hypothesis and I
think there's a lot more consensus
around this now than there might have
even been three months ago is that the
mode is really about is about context
and memory. you know, these models, uh,
you know, by themselves, if you compare
them side by side, uh, you know, they
they kind of generate the same result.
And so that the actual difference maker
is which one has more of your context
and and and and because it's the context
plus the model that produces the best
output and then and then that kind of
starts to acrue to this loop around
memory. The more you use it, the more
it's able to store memory around you,
which kind of feeds more personalized
context, which produces better outputs,
right? that ends up being, you know,
another one of those flywheels, another
one of those another one of those loops.
And so if you look at who's farthest on
this, it definitely is um chat GPT,
right? Like they were kind of the first
ones to memory. They've been investing a
lot in these different types of uh data
connectors, essentially context
connectors, you know, you know,
gathering uh all of this context and uh
and and so you can really start to see
it in the usage. But the second thing is
is and one of the push backs I've gotten
on my prediction has been well what
about like Google and Gemini like they
have so much distribution through Chrome
and like all of this other stuff right
but uh it was uh DD doss who's a a VC at
Menllo Ventures um actually uh published
some good data on retention of all of
these different ones and I think the
second reason I predict chat GPT is like
if you look at history once again it was
never the person who had the biggest
distribution at the moment of time. It
was the one that had the best retention
and engagement. Google had the best
retention engagement over the others.
Facebook had was smaller but had way
better retention and engagement over the
others, right? So on and so forth. And
so um the the data that Dee published uh
clearly showed that both the retention
curves uh which I know you and I have
both written about at you know at
exhaustion um level off at significant
portions higher than all the other
platforms as well as those retention
curves have been shifting up
dramatically over time. you can start to
see the effects of of memory and and
they have the very elusive smile curve,
right? The ones that you just like and
the only other times I've seen, you
know, all of those dynamics very few
times in my career and they tend to be
the folks like Slack and and like all of
the big winners. It's there it's just
like so elusive.
>> And the smile curve, just to just people
haven't done that, is essentially
retention goes up over time. it goes
down a little bit and then you come back
to it and you use it more.
>> Yeah, that's right. And it's usually the
result of um some type of network effect
or something else and uh and and it's
it's a early indicator that these folk
that that that platform is on a
trajectory to to hit escape velocity. Um
the third piece is that and they haven't
really hidden these but there's all
sorts of signals that they're about to
launch a third party platform. um
they've uh they've been hiring for a
bunch of roles. I've seen multiple
postings on like product manager,
engineering roles, all that kind of
stuff for you know quote unquote agent
platform and all those pieces. And so um
it feels pretty inevitable that they
will one of these players will need to
launch a third-party platform in order
to you know serve all the possible use
cases on you know on these tools.
there's going to be some value exchange
which is like hey for your agent to be
effective you probably need access to
context and memory and distribution
right so there'll be some value so
integrate to us and we'll give you those
three things right which is going to
drive more users and more usage and and
we're going to go through the steps of
the cycle and you can already see this
right like uh you know they're starting
to form preferred partnerships right
with uh some of the bigger players which
paves the way for um smaller thirdparty
players. It kind of gives lends
credibility to the platform. It's like,
well, if HubSpot and XYZ are doing it,
then I should probably do it, too. It's
it's like that type of that type of
mentality. But that's why I think out of
all of these platforms, Chat GBT has uh
that the best shot right now. And and
then a bunch of folks are always like,
well, what about cloud? I really like
cloud. I use cloud. Well, um, the
problem with that is like I think
Chetchip at this point has
like at least a 10x difference on MAU.
So, if you're a developer, right, and
you're comparing those two platforms and
you're saying and you're looking at,
you're like, well, chat GPT has 10x the
number of users and better retention
engagement. It's like, what's the what's
the logical choice of which one you're
going to prioritize your scarce
resources on, right? Um and so so those
are just some of the reasons that my
prediction is on chat GPT. And um in in
the blog post that I wrote about this, I
actually then played my own devil's
advocate and said, "Okay, here are some
reasons why it might not be a chat chat
GPT, but uh but I think we're in that
part of the cycle." That's my
prediction. I might be wrong on the
prediction of chat BT chat GPT, but I
really think I feel very confident we're
going to see this cycle play out again.
>> Two followup questions here. one is
what's your what would be the backup if
it's not JBT it sounds like it might be
Gemini Google my hypothesis of who's
best positioned
but is not executing on it right now
would actually be Apple because
>> through the the devices they basically
can see everything so they have the
ultimate view into your context right
they're they're sitting at that they're
sitting at that level but
I don't know what they're
like from an execution standpoint, maybe
they're going to surprise us with
something crazy magical. Uh but I
haven't we haven't seen any external
signals around this. So So that's
probably just based on on what real
estate and where people live in the
stack would own. And then I think right
behind that I would probably put I would
probably put Google uh because of owning
the context of things like email and the
the distribution points of search and
Chrome and Android and and those types
of pieces. But um and a lot of people
point to them, but my experience with
all of their products is uh like going
back to the retention engagement thing
is um is that if we could take a look
inside their metrics, I think what we
would see is a bunch of flyby users in
their mouths like they're kind of
sprinkling the Gemini bucket everywhere
and I'm I've I've like literally clicked
on it accidentally multiple times
and so my guess is a huge portion of
their mouse is is exactly that of like
what what's happening right now. And so,
you know, look, they just um uh they
just acquired a very talented team from
uh from Windsor.
>> Just the team. Just the team. Part of
the team.
>> Yeah. We'll see. And and things are
things are changing dramatically, you on
a on a week-toeek basis. So, we'll see
if they're able to press those
advantages in a very clear way, but I
think the window is very small for them
if if if Chhat GPT plays their cards
right because they clearly have the
escape velocity right now. And uh if
they just keep pressing that advantage
and in the right way, I think it's going
to be very hard for Google to um counter
in in the amount of time that's left. On
the clot piece, I'll just throw this
nugget out. I had uh Mike Creger on the
podcast, head of product CPO at
Anthropic, and asked him just you're
you're losing to Jad GPT. What do you
how do you approach uh the future of
anthrop of Claude? And he very
specifically said, "Yes, they've caught
lightning in a bottle. This is just
going to win based on what I've seen at
Instagram."
>> And so we are specifically focusing on
what is Enthropic and Colad incredibly
good at which is developer tools,
coding, backend stuff. So they're
actually leaning more and more into
that. And if you've seen their revenue
recently, they're making I don't know
like approaching 10 billion a year or
some crazy amount of money. So they're
actually doing super well just in a
different use case. Yeah, I'm glad you
mentioned this because this brings up
something that uh we skipped which is uh
there are smaller platforms that have
existed and will also emerge in this
environment as well. And and that's kind
of like what you're alluding to is this
tends to happen is like things end up um
you know uh you know growing into more
niches like even if you look at social
right uh like LinkedIn emerged as a
subset of of the social world but I'll
I'll but even on these smaller platforms
these new distribution channels they
they go through the same cycle. I I'll
give something you know really a a very
opposite example of the ones that I gave
like look at the platform Udemy right
they they are a platform for course
creators right I don't know if most
people know this but when they started
their rev share to creators was
something like 80% to creators they
started very high and that would that
brought on all the course creators got
their whole marketplace going like so on
and so forth I believe it was about a
year ago they announced that they're
essentially pushing that rev share down
to something like somewhere between 15
and 20%. They're somewhere at like 25
and 30%, right? So another example,
right, of like they close down organic
distribution in order to monetize like
all that kind of stuff. And the same
thing will happen in this AI world. I
believe you know cursor it's very clear
like cursor is on a path to also
probably create some type of agent
platform, right, for developers. So
that'll be like a smaller ecosystem to
play in for um some some products. Um
there's all sorts of it feels like
everybody has the same strategy at this
point as everybody wants to launch an
agent platform. I imagine some of these
other horizontal productivity tools will
do the same thing. Maybe like a notion
or an air table or like a monday.com or
or something like that. So there there
are there will be smaller platforms
that will emerge and they will follow
the exact same cycle that I am uh that
I'm also discussing. Um but yeah, in
terms of like the biggest kind of
consumer one, that that's where I think
chat GPT has probably the the most
escape velocity and uh and yeah, others
will focus on different areas. And and
just to be clear, I love Claude. I
actually use both Claude and ChatgBT all
for different things. I have lots of
love to go around for all these tools.
I'm not my prediction has no bearing on
which which product I I like the most
right now.
>> Also love cloud. So I think what so the
key point here you're making is that
there's almost a number of distribution
channels emerging many of them will be
niche. So I think of LinkedIn if I want
to like LinkedIn for me is a very
targeted audience for folks that listen
to this podcast. So yeah even though
it's not I don't know Google or or
Facebook or whatever uh it's still
incredibly valuable for the specific
thing that I do. So I think this is even
more interesting that there's going to
be a number of distribution channels
that emerge out of this whole AI wave.
The other thing I'll note real quick,
you mentioned this idea of everyone's
building agents. I just had Brett Taylor
on the podcast who's building Sierra and
we actually he made me realize why
everyone's building agents partly. One
is because the uh the outcomebased
pricing that you can uh charge with
agents is incredible because one you can
actually attribute their impact on your
business's ROI. You can actually see
this is saving an agent $15 because it
solved the case and it's um it's
attributable and it's autonomous. It's
just doing it on its own. So with that
you can charge per outcome. You can say
we'll charge you a dollar every time it
solves an an issue. So the monetization
opportunity is huge. The margins go up
like crazy. Do you can I just ask a
question about that?
Do you think that has longevity um in
the sense that uh that makes sense in
the current environment that we're
sitting in right now because people are
kind of comparing these outcomes
relative to what it costs them today
with pure humans. But once again,
competition comes in at some point. And
so that feels like that creates a pretty
ripe opportunity to, you know, undercut
and come into and then you have like
whole all like the disruption theory
kind of playing out as well. And so um
obviously depends on like the
infrastructure cost and compute costs to
to to run these things. But I just
wonder how much of that is uh temporary
versus uh versus something that'll be
long term. So you're saying that dollar
will come down to like 50 cents 25 cents
or you're saying someone's going to come
with a whole new business model and
disrupt that whole approach
>> more the first? Yeah. Like it's just
competition erodess that away
essentially, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah, that's a good point. So
margins will be higher for a while and
then they'll come down.
>> Unless there's uh something else that um
creates a like durable pricing power,
right?
>> I wonder if that Yes. I wonder if
>> that's probably the second piece of
this. Yeah. Yeah. That's probably the
second piece of that hypothesis I feel
like. Yeah.
>> Yeah. I think I guess the opportunity
there the moat would be the data like
similar to how cursor is collecting more
feedback on what is people want in their
code suggestions maybe in theory cr
>> has more and more data over time and
there's kind of this network effect.
So let me revise that. Yeah, it's like
uh I believe in that as long as it's
paired with simote this second piece
otherwise it gets competed away. Yeah,
>> good tangent. Okay. Uh, one more
question. What's the what is your
prediction on timeline for when things
when the opportunity appears and what do
you predict as of the day we're
recording? What do you predict will be
the next couple things that open that
chatbt and let's just focus on that
releases to start to open up this
platform to get everyone in there? Yeah.
Well, look, I I'll first uh uh give the
disclaimer that I feel like
any thoughts on timing in the AI market
are very have been very hard to pred.
It's always shorter. That's where we
should bias. It's always shorter than
you think uh of like when something's
going to happen. But that's what it's
felt like from the seat that I've been
sitting in. Um and uh but my guess is
this. we're going to see the the next
major steps of this play out over the
next six months. And so I think we just
saw one of the pieces drop around this
uh which was uh their re which was chat
GPT's recently launched agent mode. And
so it's kind of a general purpose agent,
you know, and I think that starts to
introduce all of the users to uh to to
using agents and they're kind of
figuring out and placing it in the
different tiers and business models, all
of those pieces. But um but it's likely
that no general purpose agent is going
to fulfill all of the infinite use cases
um successfully and there's two reasons
for this right users struggle with
horizontal tools they can do everything
and that's exactly why they struggle to
adopt and so they typically need more
specific entry points but also the more
specific use case you get sometimes you
need specific UI specific data like
other specific ingredients you know to
properly fulfill uh that use case for,
you know, for a given audience. And so I
think their agent mode was a step in
this direction. What I would expect to
see play out next is that they will they
will either launch they will announce
the platform or what they're going to
announce with preferred partners or what
they're going to announce first is is
basically a set of preferred partners
the guinea pigs you know an initial 10
to 20 folks that are like bringing
agents uh to their platform and uh and
what that does is it essentially once
again it's a credibility card right you
you do special deals with uh some like
right brand names to give uh the
platform credibility and it kind of
creates this desire from everybody else
to come on you know to the to the
platform. And then the step after that
is starting to open up the platform and
this is where the real uh you know where
we'll really start to figure out what
this game is going to look like because
they basically have to define what the
value exchange is. What are they giving
you access to, right? uh and like what
are the what are they incentivizing you
with to to come on to the platform. So
that's one version of it. Um the other
version of it is just like the
replacement to search. Um there will
probably be uh you can also see them
starting to make more moves here which
is uh like deeper attribution in some of
the results like those types of pieces.
They're bringing in shopping right like
that's one of their recent announcements
as well kind of native into the UI.
essentially they will form new
monetization mechanisms around that
stuff as well and that's actually going
to be very important because uh for them
to going back to the moat around memory
and context is that uh you know they
they will want to incentivize as many
people to their free uh tier as possible
but given the cost of AI they have to
cover it somehow so they're going to
need some monetization mechanism so the
more that they can cover that free usage
with things that aren't subscriptions
I think that probably also kind of feeds
them out. I think it those are some of
the next steps on two different vectors
more of like a third party de developer
platform and more of the you know kind
of content whatever you want to call it
AEO GEO I don't know what acronym is
that every we've all decided on yet let
me know if we have and uh and I think
those will be I think those will be the
next the next steps that we'll see now
that's what I think for JTPT I think the
thing that we should talk about is like
um
essentially what I would advise folks
especially startups is you're placing
bets. You at this part of the cycle,
you're placing bets. We don't the winner
is 100% guaranteed as I mentioned. And
so you essentially at some point will
need to make some decisions about uh you
know where to where to place your bets.
In the Facebook days, uh all those other
all those other social networks, they
also came out, you know, with their own
platforms, right? And uh iOS had Android
and some failed initiatives from
Windows. I don't even remember what that
platform was called, right? Like, and
you can look back and whoever placed
their, you know, the iPhone was actually
a very and iOS is a good one, which is
if you had only aligned your bets to
Android, you probably lost. If you
somehow find found a way to play on both
ecosystems,
you could be a winner. But if you only
aligned to iOS, you could also be a
winner, right? So like that's just right
like you you had to have iOS as part of
your betting strategy in order to win.
So everybody right now like you're
probably at the cycle and trying to
figure out well you all need to
everybody will need to figure out where
are they going to place their chips. How
how are they going to bet and depending
on how you bet really depends on um what
your current position is in the
marketplace. you know, if you're a late
stage startup, let's start with that.
Um, or like a late stage company, you
can afford the luxury to place multiple
bets and kind of spread your chips and
and kind of wait it out a little bit to
see who the winner is and then really
throw your muscle, you know, be behind
that winner. You you have that luxury a
little bit. And of course, but the risk
of that the the risk of that is that the
sometimes the incumbents wait too long
to to make that decision. And and that's
like kind of the key key question they
will need to answer. The key question
for startups is totally different. You
don't have the luxury to spread your
chips. Like you have to go all in. You
have to choose one and go all in. Um you
you have scarce resources, scarce
attention um from the market. And so
it's a totally different ballgame.
Higher risk, higher reward for sure. Uh
and uh and and that's part of the
betting strategy for startups. And so
that's kind of what that's kind of what
you have to do is you kind of have to
figure out your betting strategy and
then you know we we can talk a little
bit about how you might evaluate and
pick the right course for you. But uh
but that's where we're all at right now
is where we're kind of we just entered
the casino. Uh we just cashed put some
cash in for some chips and now we now
we've got to figure out you know what
tables and and where to to place those
chips.
>> I love this analogy. Okay. So just to be
crystal clear about what listeners
should do, what founders should do,
product team should do. The advice here
essentially is uh integrate with and
chat GPT, maybe Gemini, maybe if Apple
has something like actually integrate
with with what they launch. So it could
be a login thing, could be a search
thing, could be a connect and suck up
your memory and context. The advice here
is is you need to do this because this
is potentially the way that most
companies will start to grow and your
competitors may overtake you. Yeah.
Yeah. If we had to like really simplify
it, it's essentially
play the game. Don't opt out of the
game. Don't don't trick yourself into
thinking that you can't play the game.
That's number one. And then number two,
no matter who you bet on, just make it a
focus bet. uh because the the all like
if you look back all the failures are
the ones that tried to you know play
multiple games at at once with scarce
resources and that just tends to never
work if you're you're an early stage
startup. So those two things play the
game put a focus bet. This episode is
brought to you by Miro. Every day new
headlines are scaring us about all the
ways that AI is coming for our jobs
creating a lot of anxiety and fear. But
a recent survey from Miro tells a
different story. 76% of people believe
that AI can benefit their role, but over
50% of people struggle to know when to
use it. Enter Miro's innovation
workspace, an intelligent platform that
brings people and AI together in a
shared space to get great work done.
Miro has been empowering teams to
transform bold ideas into the next big
thing for over a decade. Today, they're
at the forefront of bringing products to
market even faster by unleashing the
combined power of AI and human
potential. Guests of this podcast often
share Miro templates. I use it all the
time to brainstorm ideas with my team.
Teams especially can work with Miro AI
to turn unstructured data like sticky
notes or screenshots into usable
diagrams, product briefs, data tables,
and prototypes in minutes. You don't
have to be an AI master or to toggle yet
another tool. The work you're already
doing in Miro's canvas is the prompt.
Help your teams get great work done with
Miro. Check it out at miro.com/lenny.
That's mirror.comlenny.
So you were head of growth at at HubSpot
for a long time. So and you gave that as
an example, HubSpot. Why would they
integrate? Why would they give away all
their data so that JB can suck it up and
you never have to go to HubSpot? You're
just working through their agent. You're
Would you at HubSpot be like, "Yes, we
got to do this. This is the game we got
to play." Yeah, 100%. And that's exactly
what I think you see them doing. And
look, to be very clear, I have not
talked to anybody at HubSpot about this.
I have not talked to Darmsh about this
but um Darmsh I think has also like
published publicly po published about
this but that the right thing to do is
essentially even though you don't you
you understand how the cycle plays out
and you don't necessarily under what
understand what your exit strategy is uh
once you get out it's better to be early
know that you need to figure out an exit
strategy and figure out that exit
strategy along the way versus waiting
and then being super late and and then
and then know what the exit strategy is.
And I think that's essentially um what
that's exa that's exactly what you see
them see them doing. They're trying to
be as early to this stuff as as
possible. And I think it's a I think
it's a pretty smart play even though we
might not necessarily see like what what
the exit strategy is out of this cycle
for them. So going back to that amazing
quote that you shared at the beginning
of the conversation by I think it was
Alex Rampaul.
>> Yeah. Of that startups win by finding a
distribution channel before the
incumbent copies them. And what you're
saying here is this is the opportunity
for startups to disrupt an incumbent.
This is the opportunity for someone to
disrupt Salesforce, I don't know,
Service Now, all these guys that have
been around for a long time.
>> Yeah, it's going to be one of the major
ones. Now look, you've already see
players that are have been able to hit
this escape velocity, uh, you know, the
cursors and stuff of the world. Um, and
and so, uh, there once again, there's
multiple ways to hit that escape
velocity, but this is going to be one of
this is one of the major ways to do it
is to basically hitch yourself to a new
platform. Look, you did it yourself
actually. You hitched yourself to
Substack super early. You took a focus.
Uh, yeah. Yeah. I was like, I don't know
why that just hit me, but you took a
focused bet and you've benefited from it
in a disproportional way than those that
kind of came later. Uh, and I think
that's actually a great meta example
here as I sit here and think about this.
Yeah, that's actually the way I thought
about when I was moving to Substack.
Just like I feel like there's this wave
rising and I want to ride this wave even
if it maybe it's not the best place or
maybe, you know, they take a cut, all
that stuff. Uh, but it worked out really
well.
>> That's right. Uh, and
>> I think it worked out very well.
>> It worked out really well. Uh, and to be
honest, it felt like it was too late.
The when I started when you entered, it
felt too late.
>> Yes. It always feels too late, I think,
to people that join like Silicon Valley
or sorry, Mark Andre has this famous
quote. He's like, I came to Silicon
Valley in the 80s. I thought it was
over. It was too late. I missed all the
opportunities.
>> That's fair. Yeah. So, yeah, there was
just a lot of newsletters. They were
doing really well. Million subscribers.
I'm like, no. And what do you say to
people now who want to join Substack?
>> That's learn from this example. A lot of
times when people think that it's too
late. It's it's definitely not too late
and it's always only just getting
started. Especially if you're like on
Twitter all day listening to podcasts
like this where we're surrounded with
this bubble of everyone talking about
something when in reality like 1% of
people know anything about what you're
hearing about every day.
>> Yeah. Uh yeah, that's so interesting.
Okay. So coming back to the advice, say
someone is sitting there and talking to
their manager like Brian just shared all
this mind-blowing advice. We got to pick
our battles, we got to pick our
platform. What would your advice be for
them to decide where to where to place
their bets? Yeah. So I think this is a
great question because once again, you
know, put my personal prediction aside
for a second and I would encourage
everybody to think about it from first
principles from their like who their
audience is, what their product is, what
stage of company they're at, like all
the all those their current strengths
and weaknesses. You got to take all this
into account. If I had to boil it down
to a few criteria, the main things I
would think about is when you're looking
at new distribution channels and new
platforms um to choose on one kind of
going back to what we said before is the
better signal is retention and depth of
engagement of the users on this platform
than it is like pure kind of user level
like MA or some some other like number
of signups, you know, one of one of
those vanity metrics. So look at that.
Number one. Number two is there's some
element of like user quality and monetiz
and ability to monetize the users on
this platform. I think the starkkest
example here would be you know iOS and
Android. It's like even though even
today it's something like Android has 70
70ome percent of devices but only 30% of
the market share by dollars and it's the
exact flip uh for iOS. So, it kind of
goes back to what we were talking about
earlier, which was if you bet on Android
only, you probably lost, but if you bet
on iOS only, even though smaller user
base, you could you you were still able
to parlay that into a win um later. Um
the third thing to look at is as these
platforms emerge, just analyze what the
value exchange is, right? So what are
they giving you to incentivize you to
develop on their platform and uh and
like all these platforms are a bit of a
it's a bit of a game of whoever
understands the rules and how to
arbitrage the rules the best right tend
to be the ones with the ed with the edge
uh and figure that out. And then and
then finally fourth on my criteria would
be pure scale right obviously even if
you have those other three but there's
you know a 200x difference in in scale
in momentum then like obviously you
probably opt to choose um the the bigger
platform. Um but last but not least is
as you go through these criteria, this
is this these are how you think through
entering the game, you know, and once
you enter the game, then you immediately
need to move to starting to think about
how do you exit the game knowing once
again that that that last step is going
to come at some point in the future that
there's going to be some closure uh for
monetization. Then that's where you have
to start thinking through your strategy
to to exit. And that comes down to
things like okay well how are you going
to own a important part of the user
experience or workflow or you know how
are you going to accumulate specialized
data in context that the major platforms
don't have um or how do you create you
know different types of like micro
network effects like all all of these
types of things. So just once again
though there's the entrance criteria but
once you figure that out and you feel
like you're in the game you immediately
need to move towards okay you know what
what what's my exit plan here knowing
this is all coming. It's interesting
that another way to think about this
model you've described is building the
strategy of building on top of LLMs and
becoming a GPT rapper because
essentially this tech allows you to say
create a cursor that is incredible and
then you could argue oh you're just
going to be this rapper and why wouldn't
anyone like they're getting all the
money here everyone can copy you like
how what's your defensibility long term
and the answer is what is the moat you
will build over I'm sitting on top of
this thing that will make you more and
more valuable long term and not have to
rely on this thing. So it feels like you
could use the same framework for
building a GPT wrapper business.
>> Yeah. To use that euphemism.
>> Yeah.
>> Um so say someone is sitting there
today. Is there anything they can do to
start making a bet? Is it simply
creating an MCP that allows LMS to suck
in your data? Is that the one thing you
could do today? Is there anything else
that's available today to start uh using
these platforms or is it just a little
too early and they haven't released the
good stuff yet? It might be just like a
tad too early. like we're like right on
that edge. But um you know some of the
questions I'm asking myself is I like
I'm kind of going through all of these
these players and where our customers
and target audience live and I'm asking
myself you know the question okay if
this player launched you know some type
of platform like how would we evaluate
it you know so on and so forth. It's
hard to you can also try to cozy up uh
to these folks. I would
place a large portion of my net worth
right now that if we could sit in the
open AI offices like at that front desk
that they are having you know meetings
with
potential preferred developers like
talking about this we could probably sit
there and and and log it. So, I I do
think some people are going to be in a
place to develop uh preferred
relationships and and make a and if
you're you're in that spot, then you you
should definitely play that card. Um a
lot of early stage starts won't be in
that card place. Um other than that, I
would say we we still need to like once
they launch these platforms, it's like
we you can't do much else until you
really kind of know what the the value
exchanges and what they're going to
expose uh for you. but also just be
prepared to turn your strategy on a dime
and go all in. I think that's probably
one of the hardest parts of this is that
uh these things emerge and you have to
capitalize extremely quickly and a lot
of times it's just it's hard for leaders
to do that because they don't want to
create a feeling of whiplash into the
unknown. We've got all these projects in
play like all you you know all the
things. So, I think that's uh I think
that's probably the the last part of
what what we can be doing right now
versus just, you know, kind of staying
on top of everything as as it emerges.
As you were talking, this reminded me I
recently noticed that CatchBT is driving
me to my newsletter more traffic than
Twitter. And I feel like that recently
shifted. Uh I didn't even know this was
a thing until I just started looking
through my referrals. I'm like, Chad,
JPG, what the hell is going on here? And
I think it's like a different version of
what you're talking about, but
essentially it's like in theory I could
block chat GPT from I don't know. I
don't even know if I can from being
>> you can you can in Substack now. Yeah, I
just saw that setting in there. Yeah.
>> Okay. Oh, interesting. But that's the a
similar kind of decision is like is it
better for me for it to be recommending
my stuff and telling people, hey, go
check this thing out or is it better to
block it off? And I think uh per your
point I and this is how way I felt like
take it all just like it's good. It'll
it's in that it's better that it's like
the from Lenny's newsletter than
something else. So someone else will
come in and eat that market share.
>> Yeah, that's right. Like if if you if
you don't do it uh you know somebody
else is um and I think and I think
that's also kind of what all the major
media publishers are really contending
with right now.
>> I guess I need a licensing deal in New
York Times stuff. Anyway, okay. I I want
to go on a totally different tangent. We
weren't planning to talk about this. I
know that uh I said this we're going to
be fully focused on this one topic, but
there's something you mentioned to me
before we started recording that I think
will be really interesting to a lot of
people. So you guys at Reforger are now
building actual SAS products that people
can buy. It's not just courses. I don't
know if people know that, but let's make
sure people understand this. There's
actually products for product teams. So
maybe just explain that briefly. But the
thing that I think is really interesting
here is you work with a lot of companies
now selling them AI tools and you have
noticed a very big difference between
the companies that are really good at
adopting AI tools and seeing gains from
them from those that don't. Talk about
just what you see there and because this
is in theory going to be really helpful
to companies that are struggling with
adopting AI tools and seeing gains.
Yeah, just to quickly explain that trans
transition so it it uh it makes sense
for people which is you know I started
Reforge just with the interest that
there was all these incredible leaders
out there growing you know on the front
lines of some of the fastest growing
companies and they have all this amazing
knowledge and I wanted to encode it in
useful and practical practical
ways for others right and that took the
form of courses uh and content product
all that kind of stuff at the And along
the way, everybody kept asking us to
essentially build the tools to implement
what we taught. Um because you know with
anything is like you can learn as much
as you want. You can listen to my
podcast, your podcast, Lenny, like
whatever as much as you want, but if you
don't actually put it into action and
implement it, then it's not really going
to create value, right? And so people
kept asking us to to really close that
gap and we said no for the longest time.
And then about a couple years ago when
AI really started to inflect it really
created this moment that oh wow now we
there's this opportunity not just to
encode this knowledge into content but
also into the products the software the
tools that we use ourselves and so we
started to take a really big bet on that
and uh and started to develop this this
new um platform for AI native product
teams. The first product we launched was
called is called reforge insights which
acts like your AI product researcher
kind of aggregates all the feedback from
all the sources uses AI to analyze it
helps you explore it um but also uh will
start to identify like what are the gaps
the things that you don't have in your
feedback today and autogenerate the
research to go gather all those new
insights so complete the full cycle.
We're going to launch two other major
products as part of this platform before
the end of the year, but uh we'll we'll
save that for some some future episode.
So that's kind of been our our journey.
And so we've seen inside companies that
are going through this transformation
from two perspectives. One is obviously
selling in that tools, but the other
perspective is for 10 years companies
have been coming uh to us to help them
drive some sort of transformation with
our learning product. uh you know most
people most companies are not coming to
us to uh just like throw a bunch of
courses in front of they're they're
trying to solve some big business
problem some transformation now that
used to be things like we've got to
figure out this growth thing right or
I'm going from salesled to productled or
um you know I'm turning uh I have more
project managers and I need to
transition to product managers right uh
like something like that like or there's
some business problem they're going
through some transformation and they
they saw us as part of that
transformation and we got to partake in
quite a few of those types of
transformation. Now, of course, the
transformation that everybody's going
through is okay, how do I become more AI
native? How how do I adopt this stuff?
and and so we've seen a pretty wide
spectrum and from both perspectives of
how companies are approaching this and
I'm sure everybody's seen the like AI I
call we've been calling them like the AI
manifesto memos from CEOs out there that
proclaim we are now AI native you know
it's some grandiose you know way right
uh and uh but there's behind the scenes
there's actually some incred incredibly
stark differences in the actual teeth of
what backs up those memos and backs up
those executive decrees that you know we
should all be uh you know AI and and so
just to kind of point out um a few of
them which is um one is that uh there I
think the most impactful thing um that
you can do is form really hard
constraints
So what what you there there's other
parts is like okay you want to
communicate this you want to establish
an owner of who's going to drive this uh
you want to build in incentives and
rewards and you see this all playing out
in things like um you know building it
into your uh you know your career
ladders or some people are starting to
introduce this as questions into uh
their performance reviews like you know
all those types of pieces and but the
thing that is actually moving the needle
are the companies companies that are
defining incredibly hard constraints. So
one company that we worked with
developed this constraint that they
benchmarked against other companies of
their revenue size and the team sizes uh
for those stages and they set a
benchmark that we will be 15 each of our
functions will be one the size and and
what that did is it created a constraint
that you couldn't hire above that level
and it forced people to essentially find
ways to adopt AI and do things to to
play set. So that was one. Um, you've
seen these other ones. I can't remember
from what company this might have been
Shopify or another who was like you are
not allowed new headcount until you
prove to us that you're not able to
accomplish this uh with AI. That's like
another hard constraint and but you also
see these other constraints on a smaller
level which is you know executive saying
I will not do a product review uh or
review a PRD unless it comes with three
prototypes you know some something like
that and so that's that's the hardest
one those are the biggest constraints
but I think the biggest change that I'm
seeing is and the things that separates
out the top few% making this change and
and everybody else is uh is essentially
making the hardest decisions and that
hardest decision is going to come down
to exiting people. So in every
transformation what we see is
essentially three groups of folks. You
see your uh we call them the catalysts
the people kind of leading the charge
the people who are experimenting you
know doing this on their own um time
like all that kind of stuff. You then
have uh your what we call your converts.
Um these are folks that will make the
transformation. they will adapt, but
they need structure. They need
permission. They need a clear outline.
They need a clear plan, right? And I
don't say this in a negative way. It's
just that, you know, that's how some
people operate, right? And and so you um
and so that's where things like uh all
the things that we were talking about
before, which was like the decree, the
permission, the clear budget, the
rewards, like all of those types of
things. Um but then inevitably you have
a certain percentage that are anchors,
right? and they're dragging their feet.
They're kind of uh you know silently
creating friction in the background uh
and like all those pieces and there's a
big difference in how I think companies
are treating uh and and thinking about
their strategy for those folks. One
group is kind of like ah we're going to
work with them very passively. Others
others have set a hard deadline. They're
like either make the they're going to
either make the transformation by X date
or we're going to exit folks. And a lot
of people look at this as being really
harsh. I think a lot of people would
think that, especially individuals, but
let me kind of explain it from a as more
of like a CEO perspective. Um, a lot of
these companies are seeing this AI
transformation that the ones that are
taking it more seriously as this isn't
adopting new tools. This isn't a light
change. This is a fundamental culture
change of how we operate as a company,
right? And you can't have 20 30%
whatever meaningful number of it is of
your company trying to operate in a
completely different way in a in a
completely different culture. Cultures
thrive on density, right? And that's why
they're sometimes the best ones feel
like cults, you know? Um and and so as a
result from that perspective it's like
hey like we for us to be successful for
this to be the best thing for all
employees we all need to be operating
around the same cultural principles and
stuff and if that's not you anymore then
we're defining a plan to exit it but I
would say that less than 10% of
companies we see are taking this hard
stance but I would say they are probably
the ones that are farthest along getting
the most adoption and are seeing the
most results of the ones that are taking
those hard stances. So, there's a bunch
of other stuff I could talk about, but
that's kind of the high level of kind of
what we've what we've seen across a
bunch of different companies. That is
incredibly interesting. I'm glad we went
there. There's a I have a newsletter
post coming out soon, probably before
this episode that touches on some a lot
of advice along these lines. Um, I I'm
excited for you guys to keep seeing
these uh insights into companies and
sharing more of this because this is I
think what a lot of people are looking
for just like things aren't quite
clicking at our company. We keep hearing
everyone is getting so much more
productive. All these companies are
>> uh running more efficiently and it's not
working here. And so I think that's the
kind of advice a lot of people are
looking for.
>> So thank you for sharing all that.
Brian, is there anything else that you
wanted to touch on? Anything else you
wanted to leave listeners with before we
get to our very exciting lightning
round? Well, actually just a couple more
points on this topic. We should we
should go is like um uh is there's
probably two more things I would say
about this. One is that um so if you're
a CEO listening to this,
>> I would say that most CEOs or most
executives are incredibly disconnected
from the actual AI adoption taking place
in in inside their companies. I think a
lot a lot of executives who have done
these decrees and all that kind of stuff
think it's kind of happening naturally.
But we talked to both groups. We talked
to tons of end users and we talked to
tons of executives. The story we hear
from the end users, the PMs, the ine all
that kind of stuff that we talked to
kind of using all this stuff. One of the
main questions we ask them is uh you
know if somebody if we're talking to
somebody who's picked up a prototyping
tool say well um how many other people
on the product and design team or have
you are using this? almost 90% of the
time it's like ah it's like me and this
one other person and everybody else
hasn't uh like taken it up right and so
the there's a huge disconnect and we
heard one story and I won't I can't say
the name but the it's a company we all
know it's a major tech company tech
forward company CEO's been out there
talking about being AI native we talked
to one of their um like uh print you
know principal PMs person was early to
the prototyping tools uh this person
shared prototype type of the designer,
the manager, the designer and manager
escalated it to the VPs. It caused this
whole conversation month later kind of
the it was like kind of still stalling
out. This PM happened to then, you know,
attend a happy hour where the the CEO
was at and uh approached the CEO and
told uh the the CEO about the experiment
that uh they were running with
prototyping and stuff and the CEO was
like this is fantastic like why you know
like like where is it at right now? was
like, "Oh, well X, you know, XYZ
happened." And the CEO had no idea and
and then the CEO is like, "Okay, let me
take care of it." And then the next day,
it happened. So there one is that you
have to go to the ground floor on this
stuff. Um, some of the best companies
like Shopify and others are measuring
actual uh adoption and usage. They've
gone to the extreme uh like kind of on
that on that front to get a bunch of
signals and close to the ground. But
it's just that it just goes to show that
uh this is, you know, I don't think we
want to talk about quoteunquote founder
mode, but um the reality is is it's not
just about getting into the weeds of
your product, but with something this
sizable, you got to get into the weeds
of the transformation to like really
understand um what's going on and adopt
it. So that that's point number one. The
second point I would say is for Reed uh
on um we do this podcast uh called
unsolicit feedback. You know, Fared
Masavat had this great quote on it. He
was like look the slowest your output is
uh constrained by the slowest part of
your system. And uh and I thought that
was that stuck in my head because it's
absolutely true. And so if you think
about AI adoption as a system, there's
all parts of the system that could be
slowing adoption. It might be that
people don't feel permission or they
don't have the budget or they don't have
the knowledge or like destruct like all
these types of things, right? Um but in
a lot of these cases it's things like
it, legal, procurement are the slowest
part of the the friction and are kind of
setting the pace of all of this output.
And you can also see this in um in just
product teams which is uh you know a lot
of there's been all this talk about
you know product managers are becoming
the new bottleneck because engineers are
speeding up. Well that's because people
are speeding up one part of the product
system and not the other parts which
makes sense like they adopted all of
this tooling for engineers because
they're the biggest headcount and the
most expensive and like all that type of
stuff. But product is an output of
design, PMS and engineering. The system
is there not to produce code. It's to
ship product, right? And and shipping
product is the function of those three
things. So if you just accelerate one
part of the system, you're just going to
move to the bottleneck to another part.
And your actual product output, the
output of the system doesn't accelerate
either. So uh I think you like really
got to people have to really understand
those two things is like what is
actually happening on the ground floor
and what what is the slowest part what
is the thing that is causing you know
the slowest part of the adoption just
like attack them ruthlessly if if you're
really serious about making this
transition.
>> What a wild time we're living through
it. It's just like all these ways that
we're all so used to okay this is how we
do it.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's ex it's exciting and
exhausting at the same time man. That's
how that's how I think about it.
>> That's such a simple way of describing
the road.
>> Yeah.
>> Oh my god. Okay, Brian, is there
anything else before we get to a very
exciting?
>> That's it. Let's do lightning rounds.
Yeah.
>> Ding, ding, ding. All right, Brian, I've
got five questions for you. Are you
ready?
>> Let's do it.
>> Let's do it. Okay. What are two or three
books that you find yourself
recommending most to other people? My my
god honest answer is that I have not had
time to finish an entire book since I
had my second child.
Um, so from a complete book standpoint,
I have not, um, I have not been able to,
um, things that I've been, you know,
that I actively read on a regular basis,
just like other content out there, um,
that I'll throw out there is, uh, uh,
gosh, Jamon Ball from Altimter Capital
writes this great newsletter called
Clouded Judgment, which is kind of
mixture of market thoughts as well as,
um, like market stats, uh, that like
that's really useful to help me a pulse
on the market. Um, you know, I was just
reading through some like stuff from NFX
that was uh that that's been pretty good
lately on all this. I know James Courier
and I share we lived a lot of the same
uh cycles through social and stuff. So,
I tend to identify with that. So, I
don't know. Those are two things that um
um that I love reading. And sorry, I'll
give one more shout out to a different
podcast which is from uh uh from two
guys at Spark Capital. Nibil Hyatt,
which I know from my early Boston days,
and uh Frasier, I'm sorry, I'm blanking
on the last name right now, who was head
of product at Open AI, and they've got a
great format where it's just those two
riffing on some ideas and stuff. And uh
I uh yeah, highly suggest that one. I I
like that one a lot. Here's my reading
tip that has changed my uh reading
habits. Uh Brian Johnson, the uh
longevity guy, he has this advice for
better sleep, which includes before you
go to sleep, read for 10 minutes in bed.
>> It does put you to sleep.
>> I don't feel like I retain anything that
I read that close to bed, though. Do you
feel like you retain it?
>> I do. I do. I'm reading fiction. Like,
it's non-fiction. You want Sorry. You
want to read something calm, not like
I'm learning. So, I'm reading I'm
reading fiction and it's really nice.
And knowing that this is going to help
me sleep better makes me motivated.
>> There's an incentive. There's a reward
there. Yeah, they're talking about
rewards and creating behavior change.
Yeah,
>> exactly. And the reason to do it is his
whole thing is you want to get to low
resting heart rate and that helps lower
your resting heart. So,
>> I've got some other sleep tips on that
front if you want to go down that path,
but we'll save that for
>> that'll be for the third podcast. Okay.
Uh, next question. Do you have a
favorite recent movie or TV show that
you really recently enjoyed? It's not
new, but I just uh rewatched Silicon
Valley that I hadn't watched a number of
times. And it's um it's painful because
like the first few seasons, I went
through almost every one of those
moments in my first startup. Uh like
hiring the gray-haired CEO, the funding
falling through at the last second, like
all the crazy stuff. Uh, but kind of
going back and watching that, I like
there's just some extra nuances and
stuff that I feel like they wrote really
well that uh that you know that I
thought was uh that I thought was really
good. So, I've I've really been um
watching that. The other thing is that
I've watched is just more of like a just
pure entertainment kind of calming thing
kind of turn the brain off is uh is um
Owen Wilson's new show on Apple TV Stick
um which is about him as a former
professional golfer uh and and all that
you know I I won't ruin the show and
stuff but it's a nice it's a very nice
um calming a little bit fun type type of
show.
>> I've been seeing that on my Apple TV.
Maybe I should check it out. Good tip.
Do you have a favorite product you've
recently discovered that you really
love? It could be a gadget. It could be
a app on your phone. It could be
something on your computer. It could be
nothing at all. Um, you can't see it,
but I do have um I just changed my whole
setup. So now I have a um Ultra Gear
super wide curved uh screen
>> with a very nice standing desk from I
believe it's called Erggonafis.
>> Yes, it's a Yeah, I think it's
Erggonafis. E R G uh O N O F I S. And
it's very nice, sleek um
>> standing desk. Uh very stable, very
quiet. Um very much enjoy. Excellent
tip. And the and the current monitor.
Very cool. Okay, two more questions. Do
you have a life motto that you often
come back to and find useful in work or
in life? Something you share with folks,
something that you think about when
times are hard or just generally.
>> Look, it's a little cliche at this
point, but I used to um somewhere around
here I used to have the quote uh printed
out about um you know, the man in the
arena, right? It's just like uh just
lots of lots of you know especially in
times like this where so many things are
changing and uh there's so much
competition but so much opportunity for
create I just I really both respect and
enjoy uh you know the game and spending
time with folks that are kind of in the
arena figuring this stuff out tinkering
with things and uh and just yeah that's
that's kind what I come keep coming back
to especially you know been at Reforge
for 10 years that's a That's a good
portion of my life and we've gone
through some great periods and some
tough periods and uh so I I tend to come
back to that and
>> that's what's always separated Reforge
from so much other content advice is
it's people in the arena sharing their
wisdom not just bunch of influencers. Um
and it's sad that Jamath made that quote
so cringey.
>> I know. I know. That's why I know that's
that's why that's why I said it's a
little cliche cringe right now.
>> Screwed it up for everyone.
>> Final question. Brian, you don't know
this, but your parenting advice on Adam
Fisherman's podcast really impacted my
parenting philosophy, specifically this
line you had about independence.
>> Oh,
>> and I'd love for you to just share that
insight about how you think about
raising kids.
>> Yeah. And I wish I could remember where
I grabbed this from so I could attribute
it properly. So, but basically, uh,
the philosophy is like your job as, if
you think about going from when they're
born until they're essentially 18 and,
you know, leave the home, your job as a
parent is to essentially make them more
and more independent. Uh, and so what
that involves is continuously looking
for opportunities for them to make even
bigger and riskier decisions uh for
themselves as they grow up. And you're
there as a support to those decisions,
but letting them make those decisions on
their own so that by the time they're
18, they are a fully independent person
able to think through those decisions
themselves. not look like my sons are
young, right? They're five and three.
So, it's not like I'm having them make,
you know, life and death decisions or
where we might buy our next house or or
stuff like that. But it's even small
things at this age of, you know, my my
oldest, like five and a half, is really
starting to learn and get curious about
uh like money and how you spend money
and where new things come from and how
you you earn money and and uh and so
rather than just like buying things for
him, you know, we've he got like money
from his grandparents and stuff saved up
and we're trying we can be like, "Okay,
like you can buy that thing, but you're
going to spend this and try to like
teach him the consequences and like all
that kind of stuff and then when he
breaks something, right? Like so it's
just small things like that, but
thinking about the time from zero to 18
as this spectrum of independence and
being um a supporting role and what
you're essentially doing is you're
trying to move as many decisions
you as many the percentage of decisions
you make for them down to zero by the
time that they're 18. like uh and that's
that's kind of something that um I've
kind of I've kept in the back of my head
since since really seeing that.
>> Thank you for sharing that. I know I
didn't tell you that I was going to ask
you about this. So that was a beautiful
way. Yeah, I didn't know where I I
couldn't remember that whole podcast, so
I had no idea what I said, but uh you
you can always say it. But but that's a
good one. Yeah,
>> Brian, uh two final questions. Where can
folks find you if they want to reach
out? What where can they find the
products you guys offer? whatever you
want to plug and also how can listeners
be useful to you.
>> Check out reforge.com check out our new
products uh like Reforge Insights. Uh
they're on the website. You can find me
personally um my writing including a
bunch of the stuff that we talked about
today. Uh now on Substack uh so just
recently moved. Um so you can either go
to my website brianbellfor.com where I
have some info or just uh
blog.brianbalffor.com
where uh all of my new writing is taking
place. But uh those are the two major
pieces. Last but not least is that um as
I mentioned Ped Mosavat uh who I used to
work with, he used to Slack, we just
have we have this fun podcast. The two
of us get on there and riff like we were
having dinner every couple weeks about
um different like product and strategy
uh types of things. And so it's a it's a
fun format for us. So if that's
something you enjoy, it's called
unsolicited feedback where we give
feedback and advice to nobody that ever
asked for it. So,
>> yeah,
>> perfect title. Uh, Ryan, thank you so
much for being here.
>> Yeah, thanks for having me again. This
is great.
>> Bye, everyone.
>> Thank you so much for listening. If you
found this valuable, you can subscribe
to the show on Apple Podcasts, Spotify,
or your favorite podcast app. Also,
please consider giving us a rating or
leaving a review as that really helps
other listeners find the podcast. You
can find all past episodes or learn more
about the show at lennispodcast.com.
See you in the next episode.